hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a
question are the wars we see today from
Gaza to Ukraine a sign of decline of
American influence and Power in the
world let's get to the bottom
line more than 7,000 Palestinians have
been killed by non-stop Israeli bombing
since the shock and awe attack of Hamas
on October 7th when about 1,400 Israelis
were killed and about 200 others were
taken hostage the United Nations has
been warning about a huge humanitarian
catastrophe with millions of people
innocent in this conflict living under
constant shelling with no food
electricity water medicine or fuel to
keep the hospitals and ambulances
running but the UN which has lost about
30 of its own staff in Gaza has so far
been ineffective US President Joe Biden
says he won't call for a ceasefire or
otherwise interfere in Israeli military
plans even as fears mount for a wider
conflict in the region and in Eastern
Europe the Ukraine Russian conflict
grinds on also with no end in sight so
what are today's raging conflicts
telling us about shifting Global power
is America still a nation whose
positions matter to the rest of the
world or is it leaving a power vacuum
that's being filled by other forces
today we're talking with Charles cupon a
senior fellow at the Council on Foreign
Relations professor of international
Affairs at Georgetown University and
author of the end of the American era US
foreign policy and the geopolitics of
the 21st Century
Dr cupin thank you so much for joining
us this is a World and places in the
world where American power used to
matter and I've just been reading your
book again and wondering whether the
contraction of America in the world is
somehow creating these
conditions you know I think there are
are two big developments Steve that are
making the world feel Topsy Turvy making
the world feel like it's gone upside
down one of them I think we saw coming
and that is the diffusion of power right
we used to live in a world dominated by
the United States and its Democratic
partners that represented say 75% of
global GDP and we're now heading into a
world in which power will be
decentered in which the number one power
in the world within a decade or so will
probably be China India maybe number two
Indonesia is climbing the ranks Brazil
getting stronger and stronger and that
this is just leading to the return of
rivalries that come with multiple
centers of power the other thing that's
happened and I think many of us did not
see it coming is the weakening of the
liberal anchor of the global system and
in particular the political weakening
that we've seen here in the United
States with the political Center in the
United States hollowing out with il
liberal populism on in rise in both
sides of the Atlantic and this in some
ways hampers the ability of the United
States and its Partners to Anchor this
inevitable turn this moment in which uh
there is an inflection point a shift in
the global distribution of power to a
much more multi-polar what you could
call a polycentric world so that these
two things are combining to create a
real sense of
disorientation within the Israel Hamas
conflict now uh President Joe Biden has
refused to call for a ceasefire refused
to say he's going to intervene in any
way in what the Israelis are doing we've
also refus to call for a ceasefire in
the Ukraine Russia conflict and I like
Americans to have a realistic sense of
how that's perceived around the world
and that there are other major powers
and I'll you know mention turkey and
erogan on see the world differently and
are we in a situation where America's
lost the ability to be the great
hegemonic benign power and now other
nations in the world are organizing
against it as it picks one side or the
other in these
conflicts you know I'd probably
distinguish carefully between the war in
Ukraine and what's happening in in
Israel and the the war that Israel is in
the middle of car caring out against
Hamas in Ukraine I think what we've seen
is a situation in which Ukraine is
suffering a bald Act of aggression by
Russia and in which the United States
and its allies have agreed to help
Ukraine but don't have boots on the
ground and in the end of the day the US
has said this is Ukraine's war
ukrainians are fighting and dying
Ukraine makes the final call about what
it's War aims are and if the ukrainians
want to keep fighting and try to get
back Crimea and try to get back every
inch of Ukrainian territory that's their
right but I do think that much of the
global South is not taking sides despite
the fact that this is a bald Act of
aggression and I think that is in many
respects a consequence of a world in
which many emerging powers are hedging
in which China
is now the lender of First Resort in
much of the global South in which
two-thirds of the countries in the world
trade war with China than they do with
the United States and so a country like
India like South Africa Nigeria Brazil
Indonesia they don't want to take sides
in what looks like a new era of east
west rivalry and as a consequence
they're sitting on the fence even though
I think this is a war that is very
clearly a war of aggression against
Ukraine in which countries at least
ethically and morally should band
together against Russia in the case of
Israel's war uh with Hamas I think it's
it's more complicated uh in the sense
that the Israel Palestine conflict is
one in which there are diverging
opinions about morality about eth ethics
about legality about human rights that
have divided the United States and many
other parts of the world for for quite a
long time and I think that's what we're
seeing play out here I think given the
nature of the atrocities that Hamas
carried out on October 7 Israel is seen
as having a right to defend itself and
having a right to respond with Force how
this conflict plays out however will
have a big impact on how the rest of the
world reacts whether civilian casualties
are kept to a minimum whether Aid Flows
In to Gaza in the form of fuel medicine
food whether we see an effort to arrive
at some sort of reasonable peace process
at the end of the conflict right now
we're in the middle of it it's proving
to be a very divisive bloody tragic
event from your experience do you think
Israel can go through the steps at wants
to do right now in destroying Hamas in
the way it's doing it and not have this
conflict grow um far more uh significant
in terms of numbers and
scale well I think President Biden has
has got it more or less right and and
walked to Fine Line in the sense of
supporting Israel going to Israel in the
middle of the conflict providing
military assistance
to Israel but at the same time being
very explicit and saying don't be
blinded by rage don't make the same
mistakes that the United States did
after
911 where we intervene in Afghanistan
and Iraq and Libya and Syria and in many
respects uh produced much more chaos
than stability and I think it's a wise
warning to Israel because Israel is
headed into a densely populated Urban
environment under the best of
circumstances there will be significant
casualties on both sides the United
States learned the hard way in Iraq that
military force is is good at destroying
things but not very good at creating
desired political outcomes so I think
that Israel right now is trying to
figure out how to balance its desire
justified in my mind to dismantle Hamas
with the reality that it's going to be a
tough war and it has to play the long
game and figure out what Gaza will look
like afterward what it's relationship
with Palestinians and the broader Middle
East will be like when the dust settles
we have Wong ye right now as you and I
are talking in Washington the foreign
minister of China he said he believes
that is Israel's actions have now gone
beyond the level of self-defense and
response but is he as you just said
essentially making a play to the global
South and again taking advantage of this
moment to maximize China's position of
looking like the good player in the
world you know I think
China is a is somewhat
ambivalent about the war in Ukraine and
now the war that we see in the Middle
East in the sense that the Chinese have
risen to a s to become a significant
player on the back of geopolitical and
geoeconomic stability and even though
they've sided with Putin and supported
at least nominally Russia's war against
Ukraine I'm not sure that they see this
as a net gain for China and that's again
because this is leading to Global
fragmentation it is leading to economic
decoupling and it is intensifying
China's rivalry with the United States
and the west but I think you're right
Steve that what China is doing here is
in some ways attempting to stay out of
these conflicts yet at the same time
exploit them to increase its standing in
the global South to play the role of the
country that's standing up to Western
hegemony and in some ways I think it's
it's irresponsible in doing so because
it is aiding and abetting Russia's
aggression against Ukraine and rather
than trying to play a more constructive
role in the Middle East whether is
helping to negotiate the release of
hostages figuring out how to limit
damage getting humanitarian assistance
into Gaza it's the something to in some
ways exploit the issue to try to raise
its profile in the global South uh and
in some ways I think as a consequence
its position is going to further inflame
the tensions that we see out there
between the West the United States on
the one hand China on the
other Charlie I want to play a sound
clip for you from Secretary of State
Tony blinkin let's
listen heat water electricity for
children for the elderly for the
sick these are President Putin's new
targets he's hitting them
hard this brutalization of Ukraine's
people is barbaric so I'm just sort of
interested in one the hypocrisy of the
moment you know talking about these same
devices being used to turn something off
and are not being able to talk about it
with regards Israel and then trying to
help the other side why their response
has been so pathetically small
well you know I think that the United
States has made clear from the
beginning that it has done its best to
get the border crossing to Egypt open to
get Aid flowing has been discussing with
Israel how it prosecutes this war as we
were speaking about a few minutes ago Mr
Biden said very clearly don't mistake
the same don't make the same mistakes we
did don't be blinded by rage so I think
this is a a work in progress but given
that uh the the attacks on October 7
were over the top were atrocities now
you have women children grandmothers
kidnapped being held hostage in Gaza I
think one can understand to some extent
Israel's rage and Israel's response but
I do think that there is a middle ground
here and that involves a careful but
strong military operation against Hamas
leadership against Hamas Fighters
against the tunnels the weapons Depots
with at the same time efforts to protect
civilians to get food fuel water
medicine into Gaza so as to diminish and
minimize the humanitarian emergency that
is inevitably unfolding when Hamas decid
decides to use its own Palestinian
Brethren as human Shields I guess my
question to you is about the tyranny of
inertia and the vested interests that
build up that don't want to see progress
on these you know fragile geostrategic
hot points is that part of the game we
have to accept that we're always going
to have certain nodes in the world that
continually erupt like
this well you know as as my friend and
colleague Richard hos put it a few days
ago in the Middle East things get worse
before they get worse uh and I think the
message here is trying to build peace in
the region trying to get
Rosa between longstanding adversaries is
very difficult business I take my hat
off to President Obama for trying to
reset the relationship with Russia for
attempting to decrease the animos it
with places like Iran and Cuba and he
did to some extent succeed and to some
extent he didn't succeed but I do think
we have to keep trying and Steve we know
from history that peace does break out
right the French and the Germans were
killing each other for centuries you now
drive from France to Germany and you see
no border crossings the United States
has a relationship with its neighbors in
which the prospect of war is Unthinkable
not in the realm of the possible pockets
of Peace do emerge and so I think when
it comes to the relationship between
Israelis and Palestinians when it comes
to the
relationship uh uh of the United States
and China we have to keep trying to push
things in a positive direction we know
from history that the the default
position in international politics is
competition is rivalry and in some cases
is armed rivalry but we all also know
from history that when you work hard
enough you can
overcome that
inevitable uh feeling that things are
slipping away this is one of those
moments those historical inflection
points where I think we could go either
way we could see the 21st century slip
toward geopolitical competition
deglobalization and liberal populism or
we could look at the moment that we're
in now and push the pendulum back in the
right direction at this point I think
it's too soon to tell which way we're
going to be
heading President Biden's National
Security adviser Jake Sullivan just
published a 7,000 word article in
foreign affairs uh and it's focusing on
the future of the world in America's
place in it one of the lines of of many
uh is that the world is becoming more
contested and the United States cannot
talk only with those who share its
Vision or values and it made me wonder
whether or not as you sort of look at
what Jake Sullivan is trying to
communicate is this a moment of realism
where America is finally beginning to
understand the limits of its power and
capabilities that is in in fact going to
begin talking with other players with
with which it may not get along in a
different because I haven't seen that as
part of of the Biden administration's
Direction certainly not in the Trump
Administration but wonder whether you
think the limits on American power are
finally beginning to shape the way we
think about what we can do in the
world well you know I would start by
quoting the first sentence in in Jake's
very interesting article and that first
sentence was nothing in international
politics is
inevitable uh and I would take issue
with that analysis because I think some
things are inevitable number one change
in the distribution of power right we go
back to the
1700s and we saw power in the world
shift from the East to the west and
Europe and North America together have
been at the top of the Heat leading the
path for quite some time we now see
Power beginning to shift from west to
east and from north to south that's
going to make the world more diff
difficult more unpredictable more
uncertain the United States is not going
to be able to call the shots in the same
way that it used to we're going to have
to get used to a multi-polar world we're
going to have to get used to pluralism
and ideological diversity because that's
the world that we're headed toward that
seems to me to be inevitable that having
been said I would agree with Jake that
there's a lot of room for taming that
world and channeling a more decentered
World in a positive direction but it
will take working across geopolitical
and ideological dividing lines we now
live Steve in a world that is more
interdependent and globalized than ever
before many of the challenges that we
need to face oh both as a country and as
International citizens require
broad-based Global cooperation
and that means working with countries
with whom we may not share the same
principles and the same values I think
the Biden Administration got off to a
more ideological start than was probably
um advisable democracy versus
autocracy with us or against us now I
think it's realize that it needs a more
pragmatic uh a more practical approach
I do think that behind the scenes the
United States has been reaching out to
China we've seen a steady set of efforts
for of cabinet officials to head to
China Jake Sullivan has twice in the
recent past met with the Chinese
leadership I think there's a sense that
we don't want to go down the rabbit hole
of a new Cold War let's see if we can't
find ways of working with the Chinese to
meet Global challenges even if we may
disagree with them about human rights
about democracy and even about
geopolitical issues in East Asia let me
just ask you finally in political
science we learn about particularly in
foreign policy the continuity typically
of policies from one Administration to
the next Administration regardless of
political party but it seems like that
world is gone and particularly when you
look at a country like Iran and if you
were basically to say in your
calculation that we should sit down and
talk to Iran we've had a zigzag in those
policies do you think as you look at the
F the situation in America right now
which is part of that Topsy Turvy
Dimension that you started with at the
beginning do you suspect that we're not
going to have continuity in American
foreign policy any longer that we're
going to continue to see zigzags and
instability and the way we approach and
engage the
world well Steve you know the this
zigzag and erratic statecraft that
you're referring to is new uh if you go
back to the Cold War really beginning
with FDR 1941 Pearl Harbor Democrats and
Republicans came together and there was
a broad ideologically Centrist
bipartisan compact that stood behind a
steady brand of American statecraft
those days are gone mainly because we've
seen the hollowing out of the political
Center in the United States and as a
consequence when power changes hands in
Washington from Democrat to Republican
you get wild swings in foreign policy I
think that is likely to continue
depending upon who wins the next
election simply because there is a
fundamental ideological cleavage along
partisan lines about America's role in
the world for me I think the key here is
rebuilding the American political iCal
center from the ground up strength in
the United States starts at home and I
think key to our future both our
domestic future and our ability to play
a purposeful and effective International
role is rebuilding bipartisanship
rebuilding consensus that is going to
take getting American working Americans
back up on their feet well we'll have to
end it there Georgetown University
professor Charles cupin senior fellow at
the Council on Foreign Relations thank
you so much for joining us today Steve
it's been my pleasure to join you so
what's the bottom line beneath all this
analysis Global strategy and US support
for Israel and Ukraine and Russia
testing the west and the role of
non-state actors beneath all of that are
real people and real families one of our
colleagues here at Al jazer the bureau
chief in Gaza just lost four members of
his family after an Israeli air strike
hit what Israeli official said was
terrorist infrastructure while DD's
family had already fled Northern Gaza as
the Israelis had warned people to do but
they were killed anyway after fleeing
South this is real while has lost most
of his family and there are thousands of
other innocent people on both sides of
this conflict who've lost their families
this month yes we should be thinking
through policies and Global crises and
asking how we got here but sometimes
it's just time to give our sincere
condolences to those who've just lost
loved ones and that's the bottom
line